---
layout: post
title: VRoom! blog - Floating Point 4 - exceptions etc
---

### Introduction

We finally finished the FP unit, it passes all the compliance tests and our extended
FP data tests. 

### Exceptions

After finishing the sub-FP functional units (add/multiply/div) the one main missing piece
was generating exceptions - on a RISC-V CPU FP exceptions are not system traps, they are
accumulated bit masks in the CSR unit - generating them is not hard, getting them correct
is harder, and requires lots and lots of testing.

Because we can retire/commit multiple instructions per clock (up to 8) we need to be able to
store exception results in each instruction's commit unit until they are ready to commit (alongside
each instruction's result data in the commit register file).

When the time comes to commit an instruction
(write back it's commit register data into the
architectural register file) we logical or together all 5 FP exception bits from each instruction being retired
in the same clock (non FP instructions simply report 0) along with a bit that reports that FP state
has changed (for example FP loads are
non FP instructions that change FP state). The results are accumulated into the CSR unit exceptions
register, and the FP MSTATUS.FS (clean/dirty) state.

### Speculative Execution

We're an out-of-order/speculative system - floating point instructions can be executed out of order,
this means that, like FP register data, we can't commit exception state until an instruction is no
longer speculative, also we need to retire exception information in-order with respect to CSR
instructions that access and update that same state.

Committing accumulated exception data, as described in the previous section, combined with the fact that the
CPU only retires CSR access instructions alone (not with the instructions before and after them) means that
at that point everything is synchronized.

One problem with speculative and OO execution is that an instruction that changes the global FP rounding
mode may execute AFTER an instruction that depends on it - we solve this problem using an existing
mechanism, there are a set of registers in the CSR unit that, if you change their contents, trigger a pipe
flush (essentially a null trap that flushes all the subsequent uncommitted instructions and then refetches
the next instruction). We use this same mechanism by adding the rounding register to this list, but
only if it's contents change.

One of the hardest bugs to find when we were bringing up linux on the design on the AWS FPGA instance
was in the integer divider - a speculative divide would be shot down by a mispredicted branch
but it would keep on going,
20 clocks later it would write random data into a commit register - for most functional units this is not
an issue as it takes 3 clocks for a pipe break, so units that run in under 3 clocks simply write
back into commit registers and the results are ignored. For the FP divide and sqrt we've made sure
that this works correctly.

### Compliance Testing

Previously we'd been using an older, rather ad-hoc chunk of the standard compliance
tests. In these latest checkin we've updated to use the current tip of tree with the new 
mechanisms (thanks to the authors and the riscv-sail people) - our design currently passes all
the IMCFD tests.  We don't yet have RISC-V 16-bit FP tests so they are not nearly as well verified.

It also passes a much larger group of stand alone FP tests (240M vectors) - we're intending to use the same 
FP submodules in the vector unit so they've been built in a modular fashion.

### Conclusion/Future Work

Time to work on something different for a while, next up will be bit field instructions (the B extension),
this part of the design is already coded, but not at all tested. 

We'll revisit FP in a while adding in a second FP units and do some benchmarking

Next time: Bit field Instructions
